We had the pleasure of going to the Green Festival
in San Franciso recently and we're able to connect
with some of our favorite people in the world
of healthy cuisine, Terces and Matthew Englehart
the owners of Cafe Gratitude.
The business was first based on a board game
called the Abundant River game.
Once there was a game the couple needed a place
for people to play the game and thus came
Cafe Gratitude.
Not only do the cafes have exquisite raw cuisine
the entire venture is based on consciousness and community.
(mellow music)
Give a little idea of your background that really required
you to dig deep to find your own inspiration
and bring yourself up.
Hmm, okay great, that's a good question.
Let's see, I actually came through the path of recovery.
So, I was a competitive athlete when I was growing up
and all the way through to about 17, 18 years old.
Kind of almost the near Olympic level
of a sychronized swimmer.
So, for me, you know, I learned
to like push hard, push beyond the pain.
That was kind of like the nature of, you know,
growing up for me.
And so, you know, I'd say I have a high tolerance for pain.
And, that's not necessarily the healthiest way
to live your life.
So, I came through a sexual abuse background
and an eating disorder.
So, I dealt with anorexia and bulimia for almost 20 years.
For me,
Wow.
I had three children and I was in my late 30s
when I really started to, you know, come to life
like realize like wow, you know, if I'm gonna live
I've gotta start being responsible for,
you know, my own life.
It was a spiritual path for me, so it was really listening
to my inner guidance and I went on, this is actually
my 21st year of recovery.
This is the first year of actually more years in recovery
than dealing with the addiction.
So, you know--
And, that's a tough one, you're talking
body image.
Yeah.
In fact, I would love for you as a woman
who's been through this journey, we can do it in a bit,
but I want you to talk about that if you would please,
about what's happened to women in our society.
Well, it's interesting because, you know, there's a lot
of addiction in our culture, but you don't have to drink
to live, and you don't have to smoke to live,
but you have to eat to live.
So, you not only have to heal from the abusive patterns
but you have to develop new healthy patterns.
You can't just obstain.
And so, for me it was, you know, a long journey.
When Cafe Gratitude came into the idea I saw like this was
the completion of that whole cycle for me
'cause I'd worked with teens at risk for years
as part of my recovery, but this was like now putting out
a sign and saying, you know, here's a great way
that you can nourish yourself, and it not only sustains you
but it has you be a part of the solution for the planet.
And that, for me, was healing because, you know,
addiction can be so self-absorbing and so can recovery,
but then that next level of recovery is when you're like
part of the solution for other people.
So, that's the pathway that I got to where I am
and I think that's what makes me inspiring
is it's not like I had an easy life.
I was a single parent with three children for 15 years.
It's more like I've learned to believe in myself.
I've learned to believe in, you know, a higher intelligence.
I've learned to, you know, give and recieve love
and my children have gone through this with me.
Yes they have, beautiful by the way.
I've had some contact with one of your sons
on a few occasions.
What a beautiful being.
Thank you.
Yeah, well let's go back into the whole thing
about women and their own self image in this destructive
path we've set ourselves on, careening from one kind
of diet and dysfunction and disorder to another.
Trying to achieve some kind of calculated perfection
that doesn't even exist.
What is your piece in all of that?
Well, I was right in the middle of all of it.
So, you know, it's interesting because this is the year
for me that something switched, you know, that was at
a deeper level of recovery.
And that was, because of what we do and because of what
I've always done I think I've been surrounded by people
who were younger than me.
I've worked in restaurants a lot.
I had an inspirational notepad company.
I worked with teens at risk, and now we're in the restaurant
business again, and most of our employees are a lot younger.
And so, I think there's always this comparing yourself
not only to the ideal that's set forth in the media,
but also then to who you see, you know, as like
what's mirrored back for you.
And, for the first time this year I'd say
I'm freed up of that.
And, I think it comes from my life is about something
so much bigger than myself.
And, I'm happy with myself, I love myself
and at a level I don't think I'd experienced,
you know, even with 20 years of recovery from dealing with,
you know, the actual addiction of either abstaining
from food, or having food, eating food.
So, the exciting thing about that for me is that I know
it's now possible, because, you know, before it was like
you could talk to people and say, "Yeah, it's possible."
but if you haven't experienced it yourself...
And, so many women deal with this.
We have so many beautiful young women who work for us
that have like what you or I or most of would consider
like the perfect body and they're still
beating themselves up and comparing themselves
and judging themselves.
And, you know, I've kind of drawn a line in our family
and said, "Okay, this isn't going to go on another
"generation," like, "this it, this is the end of this."
And, I talk to the young people in our communities
and I say, "This isn't going to go on.
"We're going to say it ends here."
And, part of that, I think, is we do a workshop,
Matthew and I do a workshop called Kindred Spirit
and the other day when I was leading it
I saw something.
One of the things that we say is that you have to
love yourself first.
And, we've heard that, that's just age old wisdom.
But, it's hard to know what that means,
or what does that really look like.
How do you embody that?
How do you do tht, right?
But I saw, like when you love yourself
just the way you are, even if it's just for a moment,
even if it's just practicing saying, "I love myself,"
it gets you t be present.
And, when you're present then you can give
and receive love.
If you're not present you can't give and recieve love.
So, if you're not loving yourself, even just for a moment,
like the blink of an eye, like a meditation, then
you can't ever give and receive love.
And, if you can't give and recieve love then there's always
some experience of a void.
Se, I think the key is, what I would say to people now,
the key is being present.
And, you know, I recoevered through these
four spiritual principles that were given to me
and one of those principles was like,
"Being here right now."
It was like, "Staying in the moment."
And, even though I worked that for 21 years now
it took on a whole new meaning the other day
when we were just leading this workshop and I saw,
"Oh, if you can't give and recieve love then you're
"never fulfilled."
Yeah, that judgement whether it's self judgement
or judgement of others is the absolute love stopper.
It kind of kills the deal.
And, I think those are the same self-judgement
and judging others go hand in hand, it's the same thing.
It's just reflected out or it's reflected in,
but it's the same thing.
Well, now we're looking at gratitude
and on the internet a year or two ago Go Gratitude
was going around and people started really looking
at the word gratitude in a new way.
And, prior to that, you'd already opened the cafe,
Cafe Gratitude, but you also have your book,
you have a board game that preceded that.
Can you talk about the journey that happened
prior to you launching back into the restaurant industry?
Well, when Matthew and I got together
about seven years ago we said, "We're just gonna live
"our life trusting inner guidance."
Now, I lived my life trusting inner guidance in my own
path of recovery, but that was like me, my guidance.
So, it's different to be in a relationship and live
your life trusting inner guidance, 'cause what if he gets
some guidance and now I'm gonna trust that?
Or I get the guidance and he gonna trust me?
But, it's been a profound journey and it's been really
the foundation of our relationship.
So, you know, the first thing we heard was
invent a board game.
And, you know, neither one of us knew how to invent
a board game; we'd never done anything like that before.
But, we just took what we knew.
We got a blank piece of canvas, we got some index cards,
some pebbles, some dice and we just started taking turns.
And it was like, "It's your turn, what are you gonna do?"
And then, we'd take notes and talk about it.
And then, he'd say, "It's your turn, what are you gonna do?"
And, we'd take notes and talk about it.
And, a year later we had this game called
the Abounding River board game.
And, the Abounding River is about, it's a spiritual
journey practicing keeping your attention on qualities
of what we call the divine, qualities of oneness,
quality of god, god is love, nature, whatever your
expression of the divine is.
When you keep your attention on qualities of divine
then that's what you experience.
Absolutely, and it's so much more healthy
than trying to corner Park Place.
Exactly.
(laughs)
A lot healthier, a new paradigm actually.
It is, it's a beautiful game.
And when you come into Cafe Gratitude, the first time
we went there your son gave us a copy of that
to take to the table and start playing to start exploring
the feelings before you even got your menu.
Right, good.
It was really quite interesting.
So, where did that go then?
Well, so we had this board game and along the way
we'd gotten some counseling to write a book
so we created the same practice in a book,
a 42 day practice format.
And so, Matthew and I said, "Well, we gotta have a place
"where people can come play this."
And so, we thought, "Well, we'll open up a cafe."
And, I had a bakery background so we thought we'd do scones
and great muffins and coffee and teas.
And then, we were in Hawaii and I read a book about
a living foods diet and just resonated.
I could feel like, "Oh, there's something deep here."
So, Matthew and I took it on for 30 days
like an experiment.
And, we just couldn't believe how great we felt.
We were already doing yoga.
We were already vegetarian, mostly vegan
and yet it was a completely different experience.
So, we thought, "We'll just make it a raw foods cafe."
And, I've always had kind of an alchemy with food.
My mother taught me that, and so, you know,
I started playing around with developing recipes.
And, we had people into our house and we asked them,
"Well, would you drive across town for this?
"Would you order it a second time?"
And, that's how we started developing the menu
for Cafe Gratitude.
And so now, Cafe Gratitude really is a gaming parlor.
And, it's a --
Conscious gaming parlor.
Conscious gaming parlor, a place of transformation.
And, we serve really, really great tasting delicious
raw food.
Oh well, I not only have driven across town,
I think we've driven about 100 miles to go to the cafe
upon occasion.
We're coming in your direction, though.
Sacramento's on the map.
I can't wait.
And, I remember the first time going there
and I bring this up for a reason, first of all you put
the board game in front of us, we were just tinkering
and playing.
And then, you interact with this "I am grateful for,"
and I am.
And, it's funny because at first there's the giggle factor.
Oh, you know, I am...
(laughs)
You have to choose your little word, what you feel
you're resonating with at the moment and you call
each other that.
Well, and it does have a giggle factor, you're embarassed
at first because if you're going to be honest and pick
some beautiful word representing you we don't have that
in our culture, it's not part of our paradigm
to speak highly of ourselves.
And so, you really through developing this put people
as they walk into the door in the space of having
to honor not just themselves but each other.
Tell us a little bit about that part and what you see in it.
Well, that's been an interesting journey
because, you know, it's opened us up to a lot of criticism.
But, we consider that healthy because we know
it's not personal they're not criticising us.
They're criticising that they don't have the freedom
to actually be able to express those divine qualities
in themselves.
And, if you think about that it's kinda sad that ego
will always argue with whatever you're saying,
but it won't argue with the dimishing.
Like, if you say, "I'm lazy" or "I'm fat," ego never goes,
"No, you're not. You look beautiful today."
But, as soon as you say, "I am beautiful," you know,
then it goes, "Whoa wait, hold on, take a look again."
You know, so it's like we say you're always affirming
something it's just you're not normally affirming
the qualities that actually have you be your brightest,
most beautiful divine self.
And that's what we're putting in place.
That is the saddest part of
human nature.
It is so sad.
I'm actually, my eyes are getting teared up
just when you're saying these things.
It is so deeply true of everyone, beautiful, beautiful
human beings that for some reason they're made to feel
in their own minds inadequate.
I mean, we know we can rail on about the institutions
that have created this, but the point is we have to move
beyond them.
And, to come to a place like yours and to be forced,
kind of, into saying, "Oh, I am delicious today,"
and you know, laugh with your friends and call each other
delicious and beautiful and intelligent
or what not, brilliant.
It really does start breaking down some kind of interesting
invisible wall.
And, that's what I think the laughter is.
I think the laughter is just a release of energy
that actually kind of blocking you from experiencing that.
You know Sayla's our first born granddaughter.
She's four years old now.
And, since the day she was born I practice saying to her,
"You are beautiful. You are beautiful."
And, I've had her like get in front of the mirror
and practice saying, "I am beautiful," before it meant
anything to her.
And now, she's four and this year between three and four
I can tell that it's like she can own it.
Like, she looks in the mirror and she says,
"I am beautiful."
And yet, you know, this is like a child that doesn't have
a history of judging herself, and now it's like can we keep
that in place, can we keep that in place as we move
forward in our life?
But, this is what all of us are dealing with.
Yes, we're all dealing with it.
It really seems to transcend boundaries.
You may be living in Asia, you're dealing with it
in another way.
It doesn't really matter where you're living on the planet.
This thing that has taken root that somehow we're less
instead of more has to be reversed.
I mean, you're doing your part very beautifully.
Now, what about the whole notion of gratitude?
As a principle, as a spiritual principle was that part
of those four elements that you started working with
years ago?
Yeah, and also gratitude the thing that's so magical
about gratitude is we say gratitude puts your being,
your experience, the beingness of human into the shape
of having, which partly get your present.
See, if I ask you right now what are you grateful for?
Let's ask you, what are you grateful for?
What's one thing that you're grateful for that you
haven't expressed yet today?
Oh, I'm very grateful to be sitting here
with you because it makes my heart feel good.
And then, what's your experience right now
when you shift your attention to that,
what do you experience?
What's it feel like?
Very uplifting and full.
Yeah, very uplifting and full.
And, it has you be here.
Yes, oh yes.
See, that' the thing
that's so beautiful is like when we put our attention
on gratitude we start realizing all we already have.
So, we stop that kind of insatiable quest for more,
or different, or better because we see what we already have.
And, that's really the notion of gratitude is it has this
be here now, be present, see how fortunate we already are.
Those little moments are zinging by us
and we're not noticing the beauty in our own lives.
We say that there's a whole universe working on our
behalf 24/7 and we rarely acknowledge it.
We're kinda walking right past it
with blinders on.
And, I think that when people can keep their attention
more on gratitude, like lengthen the time they can express,
experience, put their attention on gratitude and shorten
the distance between those thoughts that's when you
get to experience like your real beauty,
your real fulfillment because you're present, you're here.
Mostly, we're not here.
We're living in the past, we're living in the future.
We're living maybe in fear.
Or regret.
You know, questions.
And, now what's happened is as a result of following
these intuitions you've created the game,
you created the book, you went far past creating a bakery.
You have probably, I guess, just from my own experience
certainly one of the best raw food
establishments anywhere.
I mean, I'm not totally versed, I haven't been all over
the world to every raw food establishment,
certainly the best I've found thus far.
But, it's turning into an actual working financial model
as well and this is the piece that a lot
of people don't get yet.
It's how do we go from doing something simply to pay
the bills and make those massive compromises in life
to unplugging and going where you did, which is two people
sitting down and saying, "Let's follow our intuition,
"do a board game."
Yikes, you know, and then going to where you are now.
What would you say is the biggest key to allowing
somone to do that, unplug so to speak?
Well, for me it's keeping our attention on our people.
Our primary goal is making sure that
our people's lives are great.
And, when their lives are great then they can put
their attention on being of service.
And so, I'd say our primary focus is inspiring people,
supporting them in shifting their attention to all
they have to be grateful for event though they maybe
don't know how they're gonna pay rent, or somebody
just stole their bicycle, or they've got
a school loan to pay.
We don't address the circumstances.
It's like even in the midst of all the circumstances
there are so many things that we can be grateful for
and when you're attention's on gratitude you're here.
So, you actually have all sorts of, a whole host
of resources and power that's available to you
that you wouldn't have available if you were just either
in the past or in the future, either in fear or regret.
And so, by being here you're an empowered human being
and you can actually be up to something.
You can take actions that are consistant with what
you are committed too.
I think that's the key piece of what we provide
for our whole community.
We started with 11 employees and I think we're at 227.
So, it's a big community and a lot of people
that are seeing work as an avenue
for actually transforming their own lives.
A lot of beautiful young people.
Beautiful young people, the most beautiful.
And, it gives you hope.
Yeah, it's so inspiring.
Any final thoughts?
And next, we're going to talk to your husband
because we want to get into this business model aspect
of transformation as well.
I think what I'd share right now is just that I feel
fortunate, I feel fortunate that I've gone through
everything that I've gone through in my life.
And that now I have this opportunity to have that
be a contribution to other people and to inspire
other people to see their lives, there are degrees
towards making a difference in the world.
Very good, thank you so much.
Yeah, thank you, thank you for this opportunity.
So Matthew, as we're were talking off camera
a bit and you're literally granola from the ground up.
You've kind of done it all.
You're saying you've lived in a teepee, had a flax
clothing company--
Had a farm, built a stone house, but a log cabin,
had a natural clothing company.
Yeah, I would say I'm a hippie.
Yeah, you're a hippy okay.
But now, you're quite a successful hippie.
For a while.
(laughs)
So, let's look at that leap because that's a part
that seems to fall down, I was talking with Terces
about that, a lot of people can get the, "Yeah, I need to
"do something better with my life.
"I don't wanna just focus on money as a means to an end."
And then, all of a sudden, whoops everything's bye-bye.
Now, they find themselves in debt.
It's like, "Geez, my dream is not feeling as good as it did
"when I thought of this."
Why is that?
What are the principles that are falling down
in our search for consciousness?
That's a great question.
So, if you've looked at my life, if you were a fly
on the wall and looked at my life in 1984
I was 25 or six, I had two children,
was a marginally good carpenter, maybe a B+ carpenter,
living very hand to mouth in an old farmhouse
in upstate New York.
You know, very spiritual doing my sadhana,
my meditation practices and barely making it financially.
And, so you wouldn't be betting on me being a millionaire.
And, I picked up a book by John Randolph Price
called the Manifestation Project,
Process, The Manifestation Process.
And, I started reading it and it was like a light went off
like there's a spiritual world and there's a material world
and they can be the same world.
I had them very separate.
In fact, I was hiding out in not succeeding
because I didn't really want to fail, so spirituality
really worked for me as a hideout.
And then, when I saw that, wow there are these two worlds
and money can be a sacrament and money can be loved
and just another expression of the essential nature
of the universe, which is abundance, I was very lit up.
And, I took it on like a career.
And, I started being millionaire before millionaire
showed up.
I had a $400 Saab, which I drove around like a Mercedes.
I had this Post-its, pre Post-its I had some kind
of Post-its all over the house.
"I love money and money loves me."
And, "I'm a money magnet," and "I'm a millionaire."
And, it really didn't go well in my kind of leftist
Ithaca, New York community.
People were like, "Oh, you love money, you've sold out."
But, I just like fully went into it with no evidence.
Started the being of millionaire before evidence
of millionaire.
And, that's really how the Universe works
and millionaire showed up.
Through miraculous, unpredictable ways
I started on one treadle sewing maching we started
a women's clothing company with my wife at that time
and we grew it from one treadle sewing machine
to a $28 million business a year, and highly profitable.
And, when you say by one unexpected event
after, give us a couple of these things that happened
because people often forget about the fact
that if you allow it magic will come in it will intervene.
Great, so it's like
maybe Monday and I have 30 employees
and I know that I'm not gonna have enough money for payroll.
And, this is when we were not successful yet,
we were floundering.
And, so I've got 30 women who are sewing for me
that are my friends and they have mortgages
and they have kids and I know that on Friday
I'm not going to have money and I have idea what to do.
And, I just gave my life over, I surrendered,
I just said, "I don't know how to do this."
And, literally the phone rang and this woman called
from Syracuse and said, "I love what you guys are doing
"and I really wanna be part of it and I can do
"whatever I want."
I said, "Come on down."
(laughs)
And, she came down and introduced me to a friend,
a potential investor who showed absolutely no interest
in what we were doing.
The only thing, he asked me one question as he looked
around this old dairy barn and he goes, "I hope you have
"fire insurance."
(laughs)
Oh man, so now it's like Tuesday and I think, "Oh my god,
"how am I going to, Friday I need money."
So, I called this guy on the phone and said, "I wanna come
"to Syracuse and present a proposal to you."
And he was very resistant, but I got an appointment
with him and I showed him our profit loss statement
and our balance sheet which looked really grim,
but I made this proposal.
And he said, "Well, I'll think about," but the think
about it was like, "I wanna get this guy out of here."
And, then I called him on Thursday 'cause I didn't
hear from him and I really needed the money
and--
It's painful
listening to this.
He goes,
"You didn't give me much time to think about it," he said.
And I said, "Phillip, not only didn't I give you much time
"I need you to overnight me a check."
Now, I found out later his lawyer told him not to do it
and his attorney not to do it, but something inside him,
some inner voice, and this is an engineer, has nothing
to do with a clothing company, a clothing business.
Had him write that check and out of that we created
a partnership and grew the business to massive success.
You know Goethe says, "Boldness has magic in it"
and that's a good example of how boldness has magic in it.
Absolutely, wow.
In that moment most people's knees would be
too rubbery to even ask, you know?
But, you did it.
So, tell me what you learned from that moment forward.
And, tell the story of right through where you are today
with this magnificent endeavor.
Well, I mean there's another great story about
walking around New York and meeting this Afghani
fabric sales person on 39th street and said, "I wanna take
"you guys to Lithuania. Lithuania's where it's happening."
This is right after the fall of the Soviet Union and there
were all these idle linen factories and idle sewing
factories and just massive opportunities.
And, you ran into him on the street, literally?
Well, we were shopping for fabric.
And somehow we said, "Okay, that sounds good."
And, we went and out to of that we established
a 250 women owned, worker run sewing factory
in Lithuania that produced all our goods over the next
10, 15 years and we were able to like really bring up
their economy and help them.
At one time we were the number on export,
our company was the number one exporter
to the U.S., we both the most goods from Lithuania
than any other company.
And, we created long term relationships with these people
they came to Terces and my wedding, two of them
five years ago.
And, we had such great prices that we were just like
massively successful, and that was just a complete miracle.
So, I think it's surrendering.
It's double-headed, it's I have this intention.
"Hmm, let's have this raw food restaurant."
And also it's up to the universe.
I can't see anything so it's this double-headed place
of having some attention and also surrendering
to whatever.
Having some attention, not just surrendering to whatever,
using your god worship power to have an intention
but not be so attached to your intention that you're not
open to something even better.
So, I think that's--
That's huge.
So, let's tak it into--
I'm always being trained and I haven't mastered it.
It's always on going even now.
Because, here's the thing, you get to a certain level
then you play a bigger game and "Ah," you get overwhelmed
by that game.
You get comfortable in that game,
then it becomes a bigger game.
Now, we're talking about buying a farm
and having a community and the farm community's
supplying all all Cafe Gratitude's with food.
I mean--
It's big.
It get's wilder and wilder.
Big concept.
There's a line from a Rumi poem that goes like this,
"Start some big foolish project like Noah."
(laughs)
This is our big, foolish project.
Oh, I got you on that one.
So, with your big foolish project you were sitting there
together and you created the board game and now
she's thinking, "Okay, let's do a bakery."
Let's talk about from you in a business model
what happened next?
Well, we just had the intention, "Okay, we're going to
"open this raw food gaming parlor, this gaming parlor,
"transformational gaming parlor."
And, we just held space for it
and one day a friend of ours said,
"When are you going to open this thing?
"I think you're just talking."
And I said to her, "Henri, when we have a sign from God
"we'll open this restaurant."
And the next day, like less than 12 hours later
we're driving down Harrison Street and there's a sign
on a building that says, "Restaurant available."
Wow.
And we looked at it and signed a lease and we started.
And, I think what stops some people is this idea
of failure means something.
See, I got complete with failure a long time ago.
Failure doesn't mean anything except, "I didn't do
"what I said I was going to do."
But, it doesn't mean all the other stuff, "Oh, I'm no good.
"I'll never make it."
That's all some egoic, you know, indulgence.
Failure doesn't mean anything.
So, if it doesn't mean anything what's there to fear?
Just go for it.
I got complete with failure a long time ago.
So now, it's like I'm happy to say, "I failed!
"I made a mistake." It's no big deal.
But, isn't that the same part of
the consciousness I was talking with Terces about
where we can say, "Oh, I'm fat. Oh, look at my butt
"in the rearview mirror."
And yet, at the same time you can't say, "Oh, I'm lovely."
Isn't that the same part, just another expression of ego?
Yes.
Accepting, I mean in this case actually attaching
to the failure even more so.
That's right, that's right and it's just a matter
of practice.
See, we're the Michael Jordan's of, "I'm not enough."
We've practiced that, that shot we just got that one down.
And, it seems real, it seems authentic even
because we've practiced it so much.
It's just a matter of practicing something else.
"I'm adorable."
You could practice, it's gonna sound weird at first.
It does sound weird, "I'm adorable."
You practice it enough, "I'm adorable," is just being.
It's true.
(laughs)
So, with Cafe Gratitude now you're, it looks like
you've got a model that's actually sustainable.
Can you talk a little bit about sustainability here?
Sure, so
the model that we have
is that we have a central kitchen where all the food
is processed and stored and comes into and proceesed
and then it gets shipped out to the four cafes.
And, because we have that central kitchen gives us
an economy of scale and that's been really, really good.
It also frees up a square footage at the restaurants
for retail and tables rather than each store has it's own
inventory and it's own little thing going on.
So, that's one way that--
Can I ask a question?
Yeah.
I've always
wondered when we've gone into there I ordered this one
particular shake that you make that has raw coconut in it,
fresh coconut, the soft, baby coconut meat
and I thought how in the world would they ever have time
to do that back there.
So, would say when you say processing that perhaps
a lot of that has already been done in advance?
There's a guy named Jesus that starts cutting those things
open about 10pm the night before, so yes.
Maybe for five or six hours all he does is open coconuts
and scrape them.
Oh my god, I thought how can they do this?
I mean, you have to pay for it, this is not a cheap,
shall we say, not a scale we're used to when you go
into a restaurant and get something that you pour out
of a carton that has a long shelf life.
You have to pay for it, but you're paying for quality.
You're paying time, you're paying for nature.
I mean this is really, to me, so worth it.
Yes, yeah well we say you always pay somewhere.
So, you know, if you're not paying for organic then
you're paying for a contaminated field and you're paying for
an illegal immegrant that's got poisoned by
methyl-bromide or you're paying--
And doctor bills.
You're paying for ground water clean-up.
You're paying for doctor bills, you know, you're always
paying somewhere.
Like, when you put something in your body that your
body doesn't want, you pay, somewhere along the line
you pay.
You're paying in your health, so--
Let's talk about that, that whole notion of value
because a lot of times and particularly with the spiritual,
the growth of the spiritual consciousness movement
there is a poverty mentality often attached to it.
Again, because of having broken away from the known,
which is I do that for a paycheck, and you expect
an end result.
Can you talk about your perception and how you really
have overcome that and really you're thriving?
When a customer has some resistance to our prices,
which I think considering what we sell are completely
reasonable, we have a couple responses.
We say, "Thank you for being worthy of the best food
"on the planet."
Or we say, "Thank you for taking care of yourself
"and the planet."
Because, see the pickle we're in is that
we're all living these little individual lives with
our own car and our own apartment, and our own TV set.
It's just not working anymore.
It's not sustainable.
So, all that's telling us is that we need to attentive
to the whole, to everyone, everyone has to win.
All species have to win.
If you look at your diet from what's the impact
on the entire planet this would be the diet you'd pick.
If it's just about your checking account, no you pick
some other diet, but that's not working anymore.
And, it's getting so loud, the volume is getting so loud
on the unworkability of that that people are starting
to wake up.
And now, with a healthcare system that's about to implode
self-care, now you watch the buzz word in the next
ten years is gonna be self-care about we have to be
responsible for our own health.
The reason healthcare costs so much and it's not available
to everyone is we've got so many people that aren't
responsible for their health.
Absolutely, and it starts with what you put
in your body.
It's a good start, yes.
And so the sustainability really reaches,
when you take responsibility with the type of food
you're going to eat and the quality of food,
like what you have in your restaurant you're really
taking responsibility for the healing of, not just your body
and you family, but of the planet itself.
That's right, yep.
So, how do you see the future of this, like you said,
you're thinking of a farm and I assume I heard opening
new restaurants, one right near us, I'm so excited.
Although, I gotta get the cookbook because I know
how to cook, I can probably whip up a few things at home
between trips to the restaurant.
What are you thinking?
How far do you want to go with this?
You know again, it's like we're not really interested
in being in the restaurant business, but we are in
the transformation business.
And, we categorize as actually a school of transformation,
we actually see every employee as a student.
And, in the next, maybe by January or maybe February 1st
when you become an employee of Cafe Gratitude
we're gonna hand you a curriculum.
And, we're gonna say, "This is what we offer,
"these are the distinctions, this is what you can get.
"You wanna work here a year, by the end of the year
"you'll have transcended being right," for instance.
That's one of the distinctions we teach.
Being right is we call it the heroine for human beings.
Human beings are addicted to being right.
As a couple, you've probably noticed you start arguing
with each and you just keep going and going.
And, it's like what were we talking about?
It wasn't even important.
So, what are we more committed too, being right
or being kind, or being right or workability?
So, that's just one tidbit of what the kinds of distinctions
as an employee you would actually learn to actually get.
"Oh, wow being right is a mechanism that I have,
"but it doesn't work.
"In fact, I suffer, everyone suffer's including myself
"when I get into that indulgence, that habitual pattern."
So, the reason we would be interested in expanding
is to have more impact, more transformation.
And then, having the model, we have a book coming out
called Sacred Commerce in summer of 08 about how
to bring the sacred, how to bring this sacred model
of business into any business.
That's wonderful.
And, we are teaching a workshop, a three day workshop
for businesses called Sacred Commerce.
Sounds good, sounds like a lot of people
we know in this whole genre could use that.
Yeah, we did that.
We gave the first one at Omega Institute in Rhinebeck
this summer.
Okay, and it's well attended and are people
prospering as a result of it?
Well, it's too early to tell it was just a couple
months ago, but I think so.
Oh, I see okay.
Well, any final thoughts on this and what your intention
is for the world and what you'd like to see happen
as a result of your presence and Terces presence
and your employees' presence in the world.
Well, I think community.
I think that community is the only way out.
That this little mine and yours and individual
is just not, first of all it's not working.
And really, people actually wanna live in family.
I have a saying that goes something like, "We really want
"to take care of each other, but we're afraid."
We're afraid that we're gonna get ripped off,
or the love won't be, what's the word?
Reciprocated.
And, the thing is someone has to start first.
And, to be a leader is to, it's not always
gonna be equal.
You know, some people are gonna work harder than others,
big deal.
In every family some people work harder, some people
drag the family down, big deal.
If you want workability we're gonna have to start
creating bigger and bigger family units and bigger,
and bigger communities that actually are committed
to workability for everybody.
And that's, we're doing it in the workplace.
If you have gifts to give I would highly recommend
the Cafe Gratitude cookbook for anyone interested
in raw cuisine, it's mouthwatering.
For conscious interaction with others you can also
purchase their Abundant River game by clicking
on the link below.
Until next time thanks for watching CMN.
(mellow music)